Tutorial (#80)
charmed-hpc/docs: tutorials/build-first-cluster.md

(build-first-cluster)=
# Build your first Charmed HPC cluster

<!-- A tutorial is a practical activity, in which the student learns by doing something meaningful, towards some achievable goal. What the student does is not necessarily what they will learn. -->

<!-- Goal: Get a new potential user familiar with the various tools used for Charmed HPC, and build a basic cluster that feels recognizable by the end. Show how Charmed HPC provides a turn-key cluster smoothly and why its worth using. -->

> In this tutorial we will build a small Charmed HPC cluster, deployed a job to the new batch queue, and viewed the job and cluster status metrics. By the end of this tutorial, we will have worked with Multipass, Juju and Charms, Kubernetes, the Canonical Observability Stack (COS), and Slurm.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tutorial we will build a small Charmed HPC cluster, deploy a job to the new batch queue, and view the job and cluster status metrics. By the end of this tutorial, we will have worked with Multipass, Juju and Charms, Kubernetes, the Canonical Observability Stack (COS), and Slurm.
```
Tense fixes.

This tutorial expects that you have some familiarity with classic high-performance computing concepts and programs, but does not expect any prior experience with Juju, Kubernetes, COS, or prior experience launching a Slurm cluster.

<!-- How long should this tutorial take to complete? -->

:::{note}
This tutorial builds a minimal cluster deployment within a virtual machine and should not be used as the basis for a production cluster.
:::

## Prerequisites and dependencies

To successfully complete this tutorial, you will need:

> * 8 cpus, 20GB RAM, and 40GB storage available

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* 8 CPU cores, 20GB RAM, and 40GB storage available
```

boot_status_code: enabled-by-genertor
last_update: Thu, 01 Jan 1970 00:03:45 +0000
detail: DataSourceNoCloud [seed=/dev/sr0]
errors: []
recoverable_errors: {}
:::

<!-- Quick commands to test that various cloud init pieces have been set up correctly:

`juju status -m controller` should show...
`juju clouds` should show...
 -->

## Deploy Slurm and file system

Next, we will deploy Slurm as the resource management and job scheduling service.

First create the `slurm` model that will hold the
deployment in our cloud `localhost`:

:::{code-block} shell
juju add-model slurm localhost
:::

Then deploy the Slurm management daemon `slurmctld`:

:::{code-block} shell
juju deploy slurmctld --base "ubuntu@24.04" --channel "edge" --constraints="virt-type=virtual-machine"
:::

and the Slurm compute node daemon with partition name 'tutorial-partition' and two nodes:

:::{code-block} shell
juju deploy slurmd tutorial-partition --base "ubuntu@24.04" --channel "edge" --constraints="virt-type=virtual-machine" -n 2
:::

and the authentication and credential kiosk daemon `sackd`:

:::{code-block} shell
juju deploy sackd --base "ubuntu@24.04" --channel "edge" --constraints="virt-type=virtual-machine"

> :::

Reviewer 2: IMO we should group the deployment of the slurm charms together in a single block, explaining beforehand what are the components. It reduces visual clutter, since you don't need to alternate between reading text and reading shell commands.

Reviewer 2: Maybe this could also apply to other commands in the tutorial as a whole.

1        started  10.125.192.109                          juju-e16200-1  ubuntu@24.04  charmed-hpc-tutorial-vm    Running
2        started  10.125.192.132                          juju-e16200-2  ubuntu@24.04  charmed-hpc-tutorial-vm    Running
3        started  fd42:4e69:6c2a:c4a9:216:3eff:fe5b:75c6  juju-e16200-3  ubuntu@24.04  charmed-hpc-tutorial-vm    Running
4        started  fd42:4e69:6c2a:c4a9:216:3eff:fe0c:f9f5  juju-e16200-4  ubuntu@24.04  charmed-hpc-tutorial-vm    Running
5        started  10.125.192.110                          juju-e16200-5  ubuntu@22.04  charmed-hpc-tutorial-vm    Running
:::

<!-- Test the file system set up  -->
<!-- Add summary of what the last few steps accomplished and what juju status is showing-->

## Get compute nodes ready for jobs

Now that Slurm and the file system have been successfully deployed, the next step is to set up the compute nodes themselves. The compute nodes must be moved from the `down` state to the `idle` state so that they can start having jobs ran on them.

First, check that the compute nodes are still down:

:::{code-block} shell
juju exec -u sackd/0 -- sinfo
:::

which will show something similar to:

:::{terminal}

> :input: juju exec -u sackd/0 -- sinfo

Author: I agree the repetition feels unnecessary, but {terminal} blocks don't have the 'copy to clipboard' icon like {code-block} does - at least not by default. I'll look into whether it can be added to only copy the input from {terminal} and if that's possible I'd be happy to drop to just one.

> :input: juju exec -u sackd/0 -- sinfo

Author: I checked and I was happily incorrect! {terminal} does have a copy option, I will update those and remove the redundant code-blocks.

PARTITION         AVAIL  TIMELIMIT  NODES  STATE NODELIST
tutorial-parition    up   infinite      2   down juju-e16200-[1-2]
:::

Then, to bring up the compute nodes:

:::{code-block} shell
juju run tutorial-partition/0 node-configured
juju run tutorial-partition/1 node-configured
:::

And verify that the `STATE` is now set to `idle`:

:::{code-block} shell
juju exec -u sackd/0 -- sinfo
:::

which should now show:

:::{terminal}
:input: juju exec -u sackd/0 -- sinfo
PARTITION         AVAIL  TIMELIMIT  NODES  STATE NODELIST
tutorial-parition    up   infinite      2   idle juju-e16200-[1-2]
:::

<!-- Add summary of what the last few steps accomplished -->

## Run a batch job

First move to the login node (sackd):

:::{code-block} shell
juju ssh sackd/0
:::

<!-- Set up and run a batch job (and/or interactive?) -->

## Run a container job

<!-- Set up and run an Apptainer job -->

> ## Deploy the identity stack

Author: Removing observability section for the time being.
